In the distant past, when humanity was at its peak, there was great disparity. The upper class burned the planet, for their own comfort, until at long last, they ran out of things to burn. At a loss, they turned to the eldritch powers of magic, spending the lower reaches of society, as they had the lifeblood of their home. The misery and discord spread amongst the people, fueling what would go on to be named "The Great Displacement"

A great gate was opened, through the sacrifice of thousands, in an attempt to flee the dying world. However, something went wrong. Instead of leading to a new paradise, the collective suffering of planet, and inhabitants, reverted the gateway to something else entirely. 
A great war broke out. Between the hellish legions of the supposed new homeworld for humanity, and what was left of humanity. 

The war lasted decades. Conventional human weapons seemingly had no effect on these strange creatures. Through trial and a whole lot of error, humanity conceived of arms based on millenia old pre-industrial weaponry, with added magic. Using these updates tools of war, a small delegation managed to cross to the other side of the gate. These heroes were dubbed the "Pathfinders," a magically and medically enhanced group warriors and sorcerers.
These brave heroes became an anchor behind enemy lines. They harnessed the magic found in the new world, dwarfing the old world in both power and abundance, the enemies of humanity lasted less than a year after this event. Still, what remained was a mere fraction of humanity's peak.

And so they rebuilt, sealing the old world behind a sealed door, only to be unlocked by the highest ranking Pathfinders. When the world governments were reinstated, the Pathfinders branched off, with their own governmentally sanctioned group of agents, also known as the Pathfinder Society.

With the momentum from one won war, encouraged by the power of the magic found in their new home, more gates were built, for the purpose of expanding the empire, but in their lust for power, they grew greedy. The inhabitants behind each of the new gates were each and everyone an equal to that of humanity. Banding together against humanity, they overpowered their armies with relative ease, and brought long-term peace, through force. While the attempted expansion brought little to no long term effects, it was never forgotten by the other realms. 

In the following millenia, the realm of new humanity became a hub for the collective of races.